Durban - Tension and disappointment were palpable on both sides of the court as judgment was postponed in the murder trial of the LGBTQI+ youth who was stabbed more than 20 times and left for dead with the blade stuck in his eye. Mvuyisi Noguda, 30, confessed to killing Lindokuhle Cele, 23, in a fit of rage. During the trial, Noguda told the court that he believed he had been drugged and raped by Cele as he was the only homosexual present on the night in question. They both lived in uMlazi and knew each other. On Thursday, February 6, Noguda watched Cele with friends at an uMlazi butchery before proceeding to repeatedly stab Cele 21 times in full view of the public. Noguda fled the scene. Cele later died in Prince Mshiyeni Hospital. The matter was postponed so judgment would not be rushed due to time constraints. Senior State prosecutor Bonga Mbokazi agreed that judgment be heard on December 14, with sentencing to take place the following day. A member of Noguda’s family, who asked not to be named, said although the truth had been revealed, they hoped he would be given a second chance. “I know he killed him and no one has the right to do that, but he had his reasons. He is an honest and hard-working man, so if he said Cele did that to him, then we believe him. But there is hurt on both sides. We offer our condolences to the Cele family but we cannot accept that he must now spend his life in jail.” Cele’s aunt, Nombuso, said she was disappointed at the postponement as she attended each day of the trial and needed the suffering to end. “We want justice, we need justice. It has not been easy listening to witness testimony and every detail of what happened. It is heartbreaking. He was like a son to me and but now we must be strong and patient. The postponement just lengthens our suffering,” she said. She added that she was grateful for the support they had received since Cele passed away. A contingent of the LGBTQI community rallied outside court in support of Cele’s family. Members of the LGBTQI community rallied outside the Durban High Court at the murder trial of Lindokuhle Cele on Thursday to show they ‘will not die alone, forgotten in the dark’. Sunday Tribune