KWAZULU-Natal MEC for Agriculture and Rural Development Bongi Sithole-Moloi has handed over a multi-million-rand farmers’ support package (FSP) to black farmers to equip their produce to be commercially competitive. This was in response to the lack of transformation within the agricultural sector as previously disadvantaged farmers struggled to access the markets. It was said that poor quality of the produce and lack of capacity to produce throughout seasons was a major setback for emerging farmers. Sithole-Moloi offered tractors, implements, fertilisers and seeds to farmers in Empangeni, in the north of the province, in her bid to rejuvenate agriculture in rural communities. The province had launched a multi-planting season where R80 million was expected to be spent throughout the summer season to increase the agricultural produce by 1 million by 2024. The programme was aimed at utilising farms which had been expropriated under the land restitution programme. Sithole-Moloi said the FSP was the engine that powered the multi-planting season campaigns to capacitate local small-scale farmers so they could increase food production. She said they also intend to enhance access to food at a household level by cultivating the land available in their villages and backyards. “Food insecurity remained a critical challenge affecting people’s social conditions due to rising unemployment, poverty and inequality. Therefore, mechanisms for a support package to promote the commercialisation of strategic agricultural enterprises was urgently needed,” she added. Sithole-Moloi said the department would provide a support package to all the agricultural value chains that were key drivers to the province’s sustainable economic growth and transformation. "This package is what drives the intensified multi-planting season campaigns. We are augmenting the call to go back to the basics of mass-producing own food. This package pays attention in growing small-scale farmers in terms of material support across various commodities,” she said. Sithole-Moloi added that the FSP would bring balance between the usage of available land in tribal authorities and the re-engineering of mindsets for producing for markets.  | Sunday Tribune