Durban - Informal traders whose businesses have suffered because of the Covid-19 pandemic, received a boost from the Department of Small Business Development to get back on their feet. Several small businesses trading from the buzzing KwaMashu’s train station received support in the form of tools and equipment this week. The initiative by the Deputy Minister of Small Business Development, Nokuzola Capa and eThekwini Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda aided more than 40 informal traders. The equipment, said to be valued at about R600 000, included catering tools, hairdressing equipment, generators and laptops. Among the beneficiaries was Linda Mdluli, 42 who owns a salon and employs two hair stylists. Mdluli’s business was closed for almost three months which put him in debt. “As a small business, we have no reserves but we strive for the best service. Reopening has not been easy because our customers have no money to spend on our services,” he said. Mdluli received three pairs of hair clippers and a generator from the government. “Load-shedding has been one of our major challenges because without power there is little we can do. “We anticipate a peak as the festive season approaches, with the equipment we received, we will be able to maximise our potential,” he said. Mdluli’s dream was to match his service standard to those of the well-established outlets in the beauty industry. He said many hairdressers were from the township but had to travel to shopping malls to get a job. “Also, their customers come from the township because they want a certain standard. We benchmark our services against theirs. We are hopeful that we will recover from the loss brought by lockdown and be able to expand our business to employ more people,” he said. Handing over the equipment Capa said her department provided support to improve competitiveness across the sectors. “To mitigate the impact of the Covid-19 on small businesses and cooperatives, we will provide urgent support to these entrepreneurs. Through this pragmatic intervention by the Department of Small Business Development, not only will this be a form of relief but will certainly improve their competitiveness and bring up profitability,” she added. eThekwini Mayor Kaunda welcomed the initiative. Sunday Tribune