Durban – The alleged killer of a Durban socialite was arrested on Tuesday after his lawyer handed him over to the police. He has been on the run for 13 days. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Jay Naicker confirmed to Independent Media that the suspect, who cannot be named as he has not yet pleaded on the murder, was arrested and will be kept in holding cells until his court appearance “within 48 hours”. The suspect had been on the run since the night of September 23 when Mluleki Mbewana was shot outside the Rich nightclub at the Umgeni Business Park and died while on the way to hospital. Mbewana was better known as “Drip King” in social media circles because of his flashy lifestyle. He was a civil engineer by profession and was a senior official at the King Cetshwayo District Municipality. On the night he was killed, he had been having fun at the Rich nightclub, which is owned by the Taboo Group SA and is frequented by some of eThekwini’s biggest money spenders. The suspect was described as a rich and feared man who splashed out money on expensive things, including buying flashy cars and expensive clothes. It appears that weeks before the shooting, he bought a white Rolls Royce sedan from an upmarket car dealer in Hillcrest outside Durban. It is believed that among some of the fleet of his super-cars are a Range Rover and a Mercedes V Class. According to witnesses to the incident, which happened at midnight, Mbewana was leaving the club when he was shot. His alleged crime was to have had small talk with some women who were in the company of the suspect. Not taking kindly to Mbewana talking to the women, the suspect allegedly verbally abused Mbewana, who then proceeded to his car, but the suspect allegedly grabbed a firearm from one of his companions and fired shots randomly in a packed car parking lot. He then allegedly fired a last shot directly at Mbewana, hitting him on the chest. Witnesses who commented about the incident on social media said the suspect then got into his car and drove away with the women. Mbewana was buried in his home town of Mthwalume, outside Port Shepstone, on the south coast on Saturday. There has been an outcry about police delaying to apprehend the suspect, despite the fact that he was well known in Durban, but the police insisted that they were still conducting an investigation. “We cannot give you his name until he appears in court, and we don’t know when he is gonna appear in court. ’’He has 48 hours before he appears in court, so they (investigators) are busy with the investigation,” said Naicker. Sunday Tribune